---
title: "Thread by @EnergyAbsurdity"
source: "https://x.com/EnergyAbsurdity/status/2022710778038550879"
author:
  - "[[@EnergyAbsurdity]]"
published: 2026-02-14
created: 2026-02-14
description:
tags:
  - "clippings"
---
**David Blackmon** @EnergyAbsurdity [2026-02-14](https://x.com/EnergyAbsurdity/status/2022710778038550879)

This clip from Marco Rubio's speech to the Munich Security Conference is one of the most beautifully written and forcefully delivered speeches by a Senior American official since Ronald Reagan told Mikhail Gorbachev to "tear down this wall!"

Rubio lays it out in a way that leaves no doubt in Europe's collective mind: America wants an alliance with countries who are proud of their native cultures and willing to defend them.

Here's the full text:

For five centuries, before the end of the Second World War, the West had been expanding. Its missionaries, its pilgrims, its soldiers, its explorers, pouring out from its shores to cross oceans, settle new continents, build vast empires, extending out across the globe.

But in 1945, for the first time since the age of Columbus, it was contracting. Europe was in ruins. Half of it lived behind an iron curtain and the rest looked like it would soon follow. The great western empires had entered into terminal decline accelerated by godless communist revolutions and by anti-colonial uprisings that would transform the world and drape the red hammer and sickle across vast swaths of the map in the years to come.

Against that backdrop, then as now, many came to believe that the west’s age of dominance had come to an end and that our future was destined to be a faint and feeble echo of our past. But together, our predecessors recognized that decline was a choice, and it was a choose they refused to make.

This is what we did together once before, and this is what President Trump and the United States want to do again now. Together.

And this is why we do not want our allies to be weak, because that makes us weaker. We want allies who can defend themselves so that no adversary will ever be tempted to test our collective strength. This is why we do not want our allies to be shackled by guilt and shame.

We want allies who are proud of their culture and of their heritage, who understand that we are heirs to the same great and noble civilization, and who together with us are willing and able to defend it. And this is why we do not want allies to rationalize the broken status quo rather than reckon with what is necessary to fix it.

For we in America have no interest in being polite and orderly caretakers of the West’s managed decline.

We do not seek to separate but to revitalize an old friendship and renew the greatest civilization in human history. What we want is a reinvigorated alliance that recognizes that what has ailed our societies is not just a set of bad policies, but a malaise of hopelessness and complacency.

An alliance that we want is one that is not paralyzed into an action by fear. Fear of climate change, fear of war, fear technology. Instead, we want an alliance that boldly races into the future. And the only fear we have is the fear of the shame of not leaving our nations prouder, stronger, and wealthier for our children.

An alliance ready to defend our people, to safeguard our interests and to preserve the freedom of action that allows us to shape our own destiny. Not one that exists to operate a global welfare state and atone for the purported sins of past generations.

An Alliance that does not allow its power to be outsourced, constrained, subordinated to systems beyond its control. One that does not depend on others for the critical necessities of its national life. And one that does maintain the polite pretense that our way of life is just one among many and that asks for permission before it acts.

And above all, an alliance based on the recognition that we, the West, have inherited together, what we have inherited is something that is unique and distinctive and irreplaceable. Because this, after all, is the very foundation of the trans-Atlantic bond.

\[End\]

Magnificent.

---

More Fuller.


Um, we will start this morning with the   United States   followed by the Chinese perspective   and then we'll open up to the European   Union and beyond. It is my particular   honor and pleasure now to welcome the   speaker who will represent the United   States of America. Welcome Secretary of   State Marco Rubio. You have the floor.
  Thank you. Thank you.   Thank you very much. We gather here   today as members of a historic alliance,   an alliance that saved and changed the   world. You know, when this conference   began in 1963,   it was in a nation. Actually, it was on   a continent that was divided against   itself.   The line between communism and freedom   ran through the heart of Germany.
  The first barbed fences of the Berlin   Wall had gone up just two years prior.   And just months before that first   conference, before our predecessors   first met here here in Munich,   the Cuban missile crisis had brought the   world to the brink of nuclear   destruction.   Even as uh World War II still burned   fresh in the memory of Americans and   Europeans alike,   we found ourselves staring down the   barrel of a new global catastrophe.
  One with the potential for a new kind of   destruction, more apocalyptic and final   than anything before in the history of   mankind.   The time of that first gathering, Soviet   communism was on the march.   Thousands of years of Western   civilization hung in the balance. At   that time, victory was far from certain.
  But we were driven by a common purpose.   We were unified not just by what we were   fighting against. We were unified, but   we were what we were fighting for. And   together, Europe and America   prevailed.   And a continent was rebuilt. Our people   prospered in time. The east and west   blocks were reunited.
 A civilization was   once again made whole. That infamous   wall that had cleaved this nation into   two came down and with it an evil empire   and the east and west became one again.   But the euphoria of this triumph   led us to a dangerous delusion   that we had entered quote the end of   history. that every nation would now be   a liberal democracy.
 That the ties   formed by trade and by commerce alone   would now replace nationhood.   That the rules-based global order, an   overused term, would now replace the   national interest, and that we would now   live in a world without borders where   everyone became a citizen of the world.   This was a foolish idea that ignored   both human nature and it ignored the   lessons of over 5,000 years of recorded   human history.
  And it has cost us dearly.   In this delusion, we embraced a dogmatic   vision of free and unfettered trade.   Even as some nations protected their   economies and subsidized their cus   companies to systematically undercut   ours, shuttering our plants,   was resulting in large parts of our   societies being de-industrialized,   shipping millions of working and middle   class jobs overseas and handing control   of our critical supply chains to both   adversaries and rivals.
  We increasingly outsourced our   sovereignty to international   institutions. While many nations   invested in massive welfare states at   the cost of maintaining the ability to   defend themselves, this even as other   countries have invested in the most   rapid military buildup in all of human   history and have not hesitated to use   hard power to pursue their own   interests.
  To appease a climate cult, we have   imposed energy policies on ourselves   that are impoverishing our people. Even   as our competitors exploit oil and coal   and natural gas and anything else, not   just to power their economies, but to   use as leverage against our own. And in   a pursuit of a world without borders, we   opened our doors to an unprecedented   wave of mass migration that threatens   the cohesion of our societies, the   continuity of our culture, and the   future of our people.
  We made these mistakes together.   And now together, we owe it to our   people to face those facts and to move   forward, to rebuild.   Under President Trump, the United States   of America will once again take on the   task of renewal and restoration, driven   by a vision of a future as proud, as   sovereign, and as vital as our   civilization's past.
 And while we are   prepared, if necessary, to do this   alone, it is our preference and it is   our hope to do this together with you,   our friends here in Europe. For the   United States and Europe,   we belong together.   America was founded 250 years ago, but   the roots began here on this continent   long before.
 The men who settled and   built the nation of my birth arrived on   our shores carrying the memories and the   traditions and the Christian faith of   their ancestors as a sacred inheritance,   an unbreakable link between the old   world and the new. We are part of one   civilization, Western civilization. We   are bound to one another by the deepest   bonds that nations could share.
 Forged   by centuries of shared history,   Christian faith, culture, heritage,   language, ancestry, and the sacrifices   our forefathers made together for the   common civilization to which we have   fallen heir.   And so this is why we Americans may   sometimes come off as uh a little direct   and urgent in our council.   This is why President Trump demands   seriousness and reciprocity from our   friends here in Europe.
 The reason why,   my friends, is because we care deeply.   We care deeply about your future and   ours. And if at times we disagree,   our disagreements come from our profound   sense of concern about a Europe with   which we are connected not just   economically, not just militarily, we   are connected spiritually and we are   connected culturally.
  We want Europe to be strong. We believe   that Europe must survive   because the two great wars of the last   century serve for us as history's   constant reminder that ultimately our   destiny is and will always be   intertwined with yours. Because we know   Because we know that the fate of Europe   will never be irrelevant to our own.
  National security, which this conference   is largely about, is not merely a series   of technical questions. How much we   spend on defense or where, how we deploy   it. These are important questions. They   are, but they are not the fundamental   one. The fundamental question we must   answer at the outset   is what exactly are we defending?   Because armies do not fight for   abstractions.
  Armies fight for a people. Armies fight   for a nation. Armies fight for a way of   life. And that is what we are defending.   A great civilization that has every   reason to be proud of its history,   confident of its future, and aims to   always be the master of its own economic   and political destiny.   It was here in Europe where the ideas   that planted the seeds of liberty that   changed the world were born.
 It was here   in Europe where the world which gave the   world the rule of law, the universities   and the scientific revolution. It was   this continent that produced the genius   of Mosart and Beth Hovind, of Dante and   Shakespeare, of Michelangelo   and Da Vinci, of the Beatles and the   Rolling Stones.   And this is the place where the vated   ceilings of the cysteine chapel and the   towering spires of the great cathedral   in Cologne.
 They testify not just to the   greatness of our past or to a faith in   God that inspired these marvels. They   foreshadow the wonders that await us in   our future.   But only if we are unapologetic in our   heritage and proud of this common   inheritance can we together begin the   work of envisioning and shaping our   economic and our political future.
  De-industrialization was not inevitable.   It was a conscious policy choice, a   decadesl long economic undertaking that   stripped our nations of their wealth, of   their productive capacity, and of their   independence.   And the loss of our supply chain   sovereignty was not a function of a   prosperous and healthy system of global   trade. It was foolish.
 It was a foolish   but voluntary transformation of our   economy that left us dependent on others   for our needs and dangerously vulnerable   to crisis.   Mass   is not was not is some fringe concern of   little consequence. It was and continues   to be a crisis which is transforming and   destabilizing   societies all across the West.
 Together,   we can re-industrialize our economies   and rebuild our capacity to defend our   people. But the work of this new   alliance should not be focused just on   military cooperation and reclaiming the   industries of the past. It should also   be focused on together advancing our   mutual interest in new frontiers,   unshackling our ingenuity, our   creativity and the dynamic spirit to   build a new western century.
  commercial space travel and cutting edge   artificial intelligence, industrial   automation and flex manufacturing,   creating a western supply chain for   critical minerals not vulnerable to   extortion from other powers and a   unified effort to compete for market   share in the economies of the global   south.
 Together, we cannot only take   back control of our own industries and   supply chains. We can prosper in the   areas that will define the 21st century.   But we must also gain control of our   national borders. Controlling who and   how many people enter our countries.   This is not an expression of xenophobia.   It is not hate.
 It is a fundamental act   of national sovereignty. And the failure   to do so is not just an abdication of   one of our most basic duties owed to our   people. It is an urgent threat to the   fabric of our societies and the survival   of our civilization itself.   And finally, we can no longer place the   so-called global order above the vital   interests of our people and our nations.
  We do not need to abandon the system of   international cooperation we authored.   And we don't need to dismantle the   global institutions of the old order   that together we built. But these must   be reformed.   These must be rebuilt.   For example, the United Nations still   has tremendous potential to be a tool   for good in the world.
 But we cannot   ignore that today on the most pressing   matters before us, it has no answers and   has played virtually no role. It could   not solve the war in Gaza. Instead, it   was American leadership that freed   captives from barbarians and brought   about a fragile truce. It has not solved   the war in Ukraine.
 It took American   leadership in partnership with many of   the countries here today just to bring   the two sides to the table in search of   a still elusive peace.   It was powerless to constrain the   nuclear program of radical Shia clerics   in Thyron that required 14 bombs dropped   with precision from American B2 bombers.   And it was unable to address the threat   to our security from a narot terrorist   dictator in Venezuela.
 Instead, it took   American special forces to bring this   fugitive to justice. In a perfect world,   all of these problems and more would be   solved by diplomats and strongly worded   resolutions.   But we do not live in a perfect world.   And we cannot continue to allow those   who blatantly and openly threaten our   citizens and endanger our global   stability to shield themselves behind   abstractions of international law which   they themselves routinely violate.
  This is the path that President Trump   and the United States has embarked upon.   It is the path path we ask you here in   Europe to join us on. It is a path we   have walked together before and hope to   walk together again.   For five centuries before the end of the   Second World War, the West had been   expanding.
  its missionaries, its pilgrims, its   soldiers, its explorers pouring out from   its shores to cross oceans, settle new   continents, build vast empires extending   out across the globe. But in 1945,   for the first time since the age of   Columbus,   it was contracting.   Europe was in ruins. Half of it lived   behind an iron curtain, and the rest   looked like it would soon follow.
 The   great western empires had entered into   terminal decline, accelerated by godless   communist revolutions and by   anti-colonial uprisings that would   transform the world and drape the red   hammer and sickle across vast swaths of   the map in the years to come.   Against that backdrop, then as now, many   came to believe that the West's age of   dominance had come to an end, and that   our future was destined to be a faint   and feeble echo of our past.
  But together,   our predecessors recognized   that decline was a choice, and it was a   choice they refused to make.   This is what we did together once before   and this is what President Trump and the   United States want to do again now   together with you.   And this is why we do not want our   allies to be weak because that makes us   weaker.
 We want allies who can defend   themselves so that no adversary will   ever be tempted to test our collective   strength. This is why we do not want our   allies to be shackled by guilt and   shame. We want allies who are proud of   their culture and of their heritage, who   understand that we are heirs to the same   great and noble civilization, and who   together with us are willing and able to   defend it.
 And this is why we do not   want allies to rationalize the broken   status quo rather than reckon with what   is what was what is necessary to fix it.   For we in America have no interest in   being polite and orderly caretakers of   the West's managed decline.   We do not seek to separate, but to   revitalize an old friendship and renew   the greatest civilization in human   history.
 What we want is a reinvigorated   alliance that recognizes that what has   ailed our societies is not just a set of   bad policies, but a malaise of   hopelessness and complacency.   An alliance is what the alliance that we   want is one that is not paralyzed into   an action by fear. Fear of climate   change, fear of war, fear of technology.   Instead, we want an alliance that boldly   races into the future.
 And the only fear   we have is the fear of the shame of not   leaving our nations prouder, stronger,   and wealthier for our children. An   alliance ready to defend our people, to   safeguard our interests, and to preserve   the freedom of action that allows us to   shape our own destiny, not one that   exists to operate a global welfare state   and atone for the purported sins of past   generations.
  An alliance that does not allow its   power to be outsourced, constrained, or   subordinated to systems beyond its   control. One that does not depend on   others for the critical necessities of   its national life. and one that does not   maintain the polite pretense that our   way of life is just one among many and   that ask for permission before it acts.
  And above all, an alliance based on the   recognition that we, the West, have   inherited together, what we have   inherited together is something that is   unique and distinctive and   irreplaceable.   Because this, after all, is the very   foundation of the transatlantic bond.   Acting together in this way, we will not   just help recover a sane foreign policy.
  It will restore   to us a clearer sense of ourselves. It   will restore a place in the world. And   in so doing, it will rebuke and deter   the forces of civilizational erasure   that today benis menace both America and   Europe alike.   So, in a time of headlines heralding the   end of the transatlantic era, let it be   known and clear to all that this is   neither our goal nor our wish.
 Because   for us Americans,   our home may be in the Western   Hemisphere,   but we will always be a child of Europe.   Our story began with an Italian explorer   whose adventure into the great unknown   to discover a new world brought   Christianity to the Americas and became   the legend that defined the imagination   of our pioneer nation.
 Our first   colonies were built by English settlers   whom we own not just the language we   speak but the whole of our political and   legal system. Our frontiers were shaped   by ScotsIrish, that proud, hearty clan   from the hills of Olter that gave us   Davy Crockett and Mark Twain and Teddy   Roosevelt and Neil Armstrong.
  Our great Midwestern heartland was built   by German farmers and craftsmen who   transformed empty planes into a global   agricultural powerhouse and by the way   dramatically upgraded the quality of   American beer.   Our   expansion into the interior followed the   footsteps of French fur traders and   explorers whose names, by the way, still   adorn the street signs and towns names   all across the Mississippi Valley.
  Our horses, our ranches, our rodeos, the   the entire romance of the cowboy   archetype that became synonymous with   the American West.   These were born in Spain.   And our largest and most iconic city was   named New Amsterdam   before it was named New York.   And you know that in the year that my   country was founded, Lorenzo and   Catalina Geraldi lived in Casau   Montarato in the Kingdom of Piedmont,   Sardinia, and Jose and Manuel Arena   lived in Sevilla, Spain.
 I don't know   what, if anything, they knew about the   uh 13 colonies which had gained their   independence for the from the British   Empire. But here's what I'm certain of.   They could have never imagined that 250   years later, one of their direct   descendants would be back here today on   this continent as the chief diplomat of   that infant nation.
  And yet here I am, reminded by my own   story that both our histories and our   fates will always be linked.   Together, we rebuilt a shattered   continent in the wake of two devastating   world wars. When we found ourselves   divided once again by the Iron Curtain,   the free West linked arms with the   courageous dissident struggling against   tyranny in the east to defeat Soviet   communism.
 We have fought against each   other, then reconciled, then fought,   then reconciled again.   And we have bled and died side by side   on battlefields from chem from capyong   to Kandahar.   And I am here today to leave it clear   that America is charting the path for a   new century of prosperity.   And that once again we want to do it   together with you, our cherished allies   and our oldest friends.
  We want to do it together with you. With   a Europe that is proud of its heritage   and of its history. With a Europe that   has the spirit of creation and liberty   that sent ships out into unchartered   seas and birthed our civilization.   With a Europe that has the means to   defend itself and the will to survive,   we should be proud of what we achieved   together in the last century.
 But now we   must confront and embrace   the opportunities of a new one. Because   yesterday is over. The future is   inevitable   and our destiny together awaits. Thank   you.
