---
title: "The end of the Straussian moment and the coming of the Antichrist"
source: "https://substack.com/home/post/p-173518531"
author:
  - "[[By Substack]]"
published:
created: 2025-12-02
description:
tags:
  - "clippings"
---
---

---

The word Straussian has taken on multiple popular meanings since Peter Thiel wrote his essay *The Straussian Moment* sometime around 2003. It could mean a follower of Leo Strauss. In this case we would say “a Straussian” or “the Straussians.” It could be a descriptor relating to the rise of NeoConservatism, the practical and theoretical framework implemented and proselytized by the Strauss and the movement that followed him. It could refer to a hidden or second meaning in a text, which is sometimes also described as an “esoteric” reading, a kind of philosophical analysis popularized by Strauss. Or, finally, it could mean a *Katechon,* something that is standing in the way, disguising a powerful truth or intentionally misleading those who are looking for it. This last definition is the one we are most interested in today, but you will find all of those meanings employed in Thiel’s essay, often simultaneously.

## Leo Strauss: A guide for the perplexed.

Deciphering what Leo Strauss *really meant* in his writing is famously and intentionally open-ended. For the layman, Leo Strauss was a Conservative Jewish intellectual who was an advocate for the use of classical philosophical education to gird society against the evils of the world. His students have been fiercely loyal and highly influential in conservative politics, especially in circles formally and informally, rightly or wrongly, referred to as *neoconservative*.

He is probably best known for his exploration of the idea of “esoteric” or “double” meanings intentionally left by philosophers when exploring taboo subjects. It is widely understood that Strauss used this technique as a device in his own writing to disguise taboo ideas he truly believed, or as some assert *feigned* believing in order to [mislead the unworthy](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/leo-strauss-and-the-theologicopolitical-problem/83CD3A337D209AF69172FB712006920C) from discovering the true *secret knowledge* of philosophy.

So we shall turn to an expert in separating *real meanings* from from *formal arguments*: James Burnham. For those who have not read it, Burnham’s analysis of Dante’s *De Monarchia* is simply the best political essay of the last 100 years.

So, following Burnham’s lead let’s look a the biography of Leo Strauss: He was a member of the Jewish intellectual elite during Weimar Germany. During that time he was a fervent Zionist, contributing to Jüdische Rundschau, an influential German Zionist publication.

Strauss fled from Hitler, moving to America in 1937, where he would go on to teach at the New School in Manhattan, sometimes referred to as *Parsons*, after the influential design school it houses. For those not familiar with the primacy and rank of Manhattan cultural institutions, teaching at The New School means you are *Cool.*

While teaching at the New School, Strauss gave a [1941 lecture on German Nihilism](https://ia800900.us.archive.org/22/items/LeoStraussGermanNihilismIntegral1941/Leo%20Strauss%20-%20%27%27German%20Nihilism%27%27%20%5BIntegral%2C%201941%5D.pdf). If Burnham’s 1943 *[Dante: Politics as Wish](https://www.unqualified-reservations.org/2007/08/james-burnhams-dante-politics-as-wish/)* is the best political essay of the century, the lecture on German Nihilism from Strauss in 1941 is the worst of the century.

In this lecture we get a crystallization of much of the absurd and contradictory rhetoric from Strauss which permeates the entirety of his writing career. Chiefly, Strauss in this lecture on so called “German Nihilism” makes a long, confused, and tangential argument that Adolf Hitler, who [repeatedly and emphatically argued](https://archive.org/details/norman-h.-baynes-hitlers-speeches-vol-1/page/n7/mode/2up) that “The State is not an end in itself, but the means to an end. Its task is to preserve and promote the life of the nation. The National Socialist State exists to serve the people, to secure their existence, their strength, and their future” was *secretly inspired* by a nihilistic desire to *destroy* the German people, or to destroy western governance as such.

If we want to separate the absurd formal argument from the real argument here we must make one simple observation. *Strauss the Zionist clearly likes and agrees with Adolf Hitler*. Of course he is precluded from ever uttering such a transgressive truth in his own work. Hitler desires a closed, sovereign state whose sole goal is to sustain the German people. Strauss, a militant Zionist, wants a closed, sovereign state whose sole goal is to sustain the Jewish people.

Having come to America and finding it to be a so-called “open society” where Jews, *or any other insular group*, could coordinate for their own interests against those of the sovereign, Strauss had an obligation to his people to prevent an “American Hitler” who would recognize this state of competition and close American society, shutting out Jews from its bounty. So he crafted an *intentionally misleading argument* that nihilism is a necessary precursor to closed, illiberal society, when in fact, nihilism - a dogma inviting chaos and disorder - is liberalism’s bedfellow. Moreover, Strauss had to do this in such a way as to ensure a *careful reader* would understand that this was in fact a *trick*, and that nihilism would lead to the destruction, not preservation of a people. Nihilism and liberalism *did not* create Nazism. The purpose of Nazism was to *constrain* nihilism and liberalism as once the Church had done - an attempt to enforce order on Chaos, but which rejected the role of Christianity in doing so because it felt Christianity was *too Jewish.*

To put this in extremely simple terms as [many before me have argued](https://www.tabletmag.com/sections/arts-letters/articles/bronze-age-pervert-dissertation-leo-strauss), the primary goal of Leo Strauss was to prevent an American Hitler while still leaving room for the creation of a [Jewish Hitler](https://www.google.com/search?q=The+German+Stranger%3A+Leo+Strauss+and+National+Socialism+pdf&num=10&sca_esv=c6485aeb6a717754&rlz=1C5CHFA_enCA921CA921&sxsrf=AE3TifO2DomWaydU5LvG3yAEhSCElXI8uw%3A1757872556925&ei=rAHHaO6YOOyx0PEP1oKugQc&ved=0ahUKEwjunsPK6diPAxXsGDQIHVaBK3AQ4dUDCBA&uact=5&oq=The+German+Stranger%3A+Leo+Strauss+and+National+Socialism+pdf&gs_lp=Egxnd3Mtd2l6LXNlcnAiO1RoZSBHZXJtYW4gU3RyYW5nZXI6IExlbyBTdHJhdXNzIGFuZCBOYXRpb25hbCBTb2NpYWxpc20gcGRmMgUQIRigATIFECEYoAFI7RFQ-QFYyw5wAXgAkAEAmAGCAqABxwSqAQUwLjMuMbgBA8gBAPgBAZgCAqAC4AHCAgcQIRigARgKmAMAiAYBkgcDMC4yoAfiCLIHAzAuMrgH4AHCBwMwLjLIBwQ&sclient=gws-wiz-serp).

Let’s take a look at a segment of a 1985 anecdote extracted from a [personal essay](https://claremontreviewofbooks.com/leo-strauss-and-modern-judaism/) about Leo Strauss from [Emil Fackenheim](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emil_Fackenheim) who dedicated his 1982 book *To Mend the World: Foundations of Future Jewish Thought* to Leo Strauss. Fackenheim famously conceived of an addition to the 613 mitzvot, or Jewish Laws of Maimonides. A 614th Mitzvot: *to ensure that the Jewish people do not perish* and to rob Hitler of a “posthumous victory.” Readers of [Second City Bureaucrat](https://secondcitybureaucrat.substack.com/p/looking-at-other-consequences-and) might want to pause here and take note of the striking similarity between the Fackenheim’s 614th Mitzvot and the Peasant antisemitism of David Lane, who coined the “14 words” which mean *the same thing in reverse*. Here is Fackenheim’s story:

> Well, as I say, I was at Toronto and decided to take a daring step for a young man—namely, to seek out Strauss in person. He was still living in New York, and he welcomed me with open arms. I was afraid of stealing his time, but he didn’t seem to consider me a thief of his time. We must have spent four or five hours talking, and I thought, could it really be that this man is as lonely, intellectually, as I was? In any case, he was very kind to me, and whenever I got sort of depressed-philosophically depressed, that is to say—I would take a train or a plane to New York and spend a few hours with him.
> 
> I found that some of these meetings had a great shock value. I was writing the only paper on Maimonides ever published—of course largely under Strauss’s influence—and as I discussed it with him, I learned a few lessons about what it means to read a text carefully. If indeed, Heidegger notwithstanding, it is to be possible to span that gap from the “now” to the ancient text, then the first condition is that the text is to be taken with the greatest seriousness. I forget what the issue was, but I asserted something about the *Guide to the Perplexed* which appears in the second book, and Strauss said, “Have you noticed that he comes back to the subject in the third book?” Well, I hadn’t noticed it. I was too young and innocent and ignorant. He not only made me notice it, but he showed that there must be great significance if Maimonides returns in the third book to the subject already dealt with in the second. Maybe what is in the second book is only exoteric and meant for the people who don’t read any further. I think that, for those who were fortunate enough actually to study with Strauss, one of the greatest lessons must have been to learn how to treat a text carefully, to read it in its own right. To some extent this must have been his Jewish heritage, because it is a Jewish tradition that the text must be read carefully—primarily, of course, the Bible. And in the *Sayings of the Fathers* it is said, “Turn it and turn it, everything is in it.” Then it applies derivatively to the Talmud, and then it applies derivatively to the commentaries on the Talmud. Heinrich Heine, who was able to mock things sacred and get away with it, told of a Christian-Jewish disputation which is foredoomed from the start because each quotes his own authorities. Finally, the rabbi quotes an obscure Talmudic commentary, and the Christian says, “The *Tausvos-Yontef* can go to the Devil!” The rabbi goes crazy because for him this commentary is God Himself. I think the tradition mockingly alluded to here must have had a share in the development of Strauss’s thought.

What are we to make of this?

Is the (often ridiculous) practice of Straussian textual over interpretation rooted in Jewish religious practice? What is the subject Maimonides covers in the second book which he returns to in the third book to reveal its hidden meaning? You can look into this yourself but if you want to skip the *agony* I can tell you now. The secret meaning Strauss sees in the teachings of Maimonides is that Philosophers must guide their people to the truth of god through the falsities of religion, through simulation and dissimulation, or through *Machiavellian dynamite*. For Strauss and Maimonides the purpose of philosophers is to *steer the world* in the interests of *their people*. That Philosophers both discern and amplify the will of god and also *are* god:

“ *Ἐν ἀρχῇ ἦν ὁ λόγος, καὶ ὁ λόγος ἦν πρὸς τὸν θεόν, καὶ θεὸς ἦν ὁ λόγος οὗτος ἦν ἐν ἀρχῇ πρὸς τὸν θεόν πάντα δι’ αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο, καὶ χωρὶς αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο οὐδὲ ἕν ὃ γέγονεν ἐν αὐτῷ ζωὴ ἦν, καὶ ἡ ζωὴ ἦν τὸ φῶς τῶν ἀνθρώπων καὶ τὸ φῶς ἐν τῇ σκοτίᾳ φαίνει, καὶ ἡ σκοτία αὐτὸ οὐ κατέλαβεν* ”

So where is Strauss *steering* us? Let’s look back at his 1941 lecture on German Nihilism which would become so important. Is Strauss really advocating for Nihilism and the liberal democracy of *Churchill* as he appears to be? Doubtful.

From *German Nihilism:*

> What is the motive underlying the protest against modern civilisation, against the spirit of the West\*, and in particular of the Anglo-Saxon\* West?
> 
> The answer must be: *it is a moral protest*. That protest proceeds from the conviction that the internationalism inherent in modern civilisation, or, more precisely, that the establishment of a perfectly open society which is as it were the goal of modern civilisation, and therefore all aspirations directed toward that goal, are irreconcilable with the basic demands of moral life. That protest proceeds from the conviction that the root of all moral life is essentially and therefore eternally the closed society; from the conviction that the open society is bound to be, if not immoral, at least amoral: the meeting ground of seekers of pleasure, of gain, of irresponsible power, indeed of any kind of irresponsibility and lack of seriousness.
> 
> Moral life, it is asserted, means serious life. Seriousness, and the ceremonial of seriousness the flag and the oath to the flag, are the distinctive features of the closed society, of the society which by its very nature, is constantly confronted with, and basically oriented toward, the *Ernstfall*, the serious moment, M-day, war. Only life in such a tense atmosphere, only a life which is based on constant awareness of the sacrifices\* to which it owes its existence, and of the necessity, the duty of sacrifice of life and all worldly goods, is truly human: the sublime is unknown to the open society.
> 
> **The societies of the West which claim to aspire toward the open society, actually are closed societies in a state of disintegration: their moral value, their respectability, depends entirely on their still being closed societies.**
> 
> Let us pursue this argument a little further. The open society, it is asserted, is actually impossible. Its possibility is not proved at all by what is called the progress\* toward the open society. For that progress is largely fictitious or merely verbal. Certain basic facts of human nature which have been honestly recognized by earlier generations who used to call a spade a spade, are at the present time verbally denied, superficially covered over by fictions legal and others, e.g., by the belief that one can abolish war by pacts not backed by military forces punishing him who breaks the pact, or by calling ministries of war\* ministries of defence\* or by calling punishment sanctions, or by calling capital punishment das hochste Strafmass. The open society is morally inferior to the closed society also because the former is based on hypocrisy.

Strauss spent the 20 years prior to giving this lecture advocating for a closed Jewish society in Israel. He is an advocate for closed societies. Strauss, in his private correspondence with Jacob Klein, describes National Socialism - a closed society - as a “perversion of Judaism” or a “ [Judaized Judaism](https://www.lib.uchicago.edu/e/scrc/findingaids/view.php?eadid=ICU.SPCL.STRAUSSLEO#idp8475745911584).”

From Nihilism again:

> “A lover of paradoxes might be tempted to assert an essential affinity of youth to nihilism. I should be the last to deny the juvenile character of that specific nihilism which I have tried to describe. But I must disagree with the modern pedagogue all the more in so far as I am convinced that about the most dangerous thing for these young men was precisely what is called *progressive education*: they rather needed old-fashioned teachers, such old-fashioned teachers of course as would be undogmatic enough to understand the aspirations of their pupils.”

We can see here that Strauss identifies the “nihilistic” impulse of youth, which he believes was the cause of Nazism, can be *restrained* by “old fashioned teachers.” Of course this is one half of the Straussian project - to promote old fashioned teachers and the study of the Classics.

What, exactly, is meant by old fashioned teachers in practice we shall come to see means, at least in part, the *homosexual seduction* of students by their teachers, a practice of the ancient Greeks. The concept of homosexuality as not only an *act* which is immoral, but of homosexual as *a thing one becomes* after participation in this act is a *moral innovation* of the British Empire. This repression and demonization of homosexuality is an extremely understudied cause for the resentment driven backlash the Anglo-American empire has received and continues to receive under the guise of “Anti-colonialism”and other forms of gay progressive revanchism.

## The Last Straussian

But was Leo Strauss really some kind of *Gay Jewish Nazi*? For an answer to this question we can really only turn to the worlds foremost authority on Straussian Gay Jewish Nazism:

> “\[Strauss\] admired Fascism and even Nazism... He was only sorry he couldn’t join it because he was Jewish.”

This of course is a quote from the Bronze Age Pervert, who is himself a Straussian. I think what follows will be very interesting for both friends and enemies of BAP. We’re going to take a look at episode 162 of BAP’s lecture series Caribbean Rhythms which is titled “Conservatives” but is about Leo Strauss and should just be called “Jews.” I don’t mean that in a pejorative way. This episode from BAP covers the same ground as his PHD thesis but in a better, more succinct form. The subject of both Selective Breeding and the Birth of Philosophy and episode 162 of Caribbean Rhythms is the same as the project of Leo Strauss and of Emil Fackenheim, and of Maimonides. How to beneficially guide the Jewish people and prevent the Holocaust - the 614 words.

BAP’s lecture on ~~Strauss~~ ~~Jews~~ “Conservatives” is on its surface an attack on conservative intellectuals who become bogged down in meaningless semantic debates. The episode is filled with unusual comments like “I am giving you a hint here” and “I don’t know why I’m bringing this up.” The importance of universalism vs. particularism is the example given of a spurious argument among “conservatives”, which BAP then uses a Burnhamite, Machiavellian realist lens to rebut:

> “It’s dishonest… what these people really cared about is the assertion of *their own ways* against a *foreign encroacher* that had defeated them… and in such cases the dishonesty comes from the dishonesty of victimization \[mocking\] ‘well other people are like me too! and every people deserves to have its own!’
> 
> Its this kind of thing where you try to take your condition and try to… actually they are universalizing it. *Do you understand*? It is of course the pleading and saccharine self justification that Zionists use to justify… you know their kind of ‘ *a people, each in its own nation…’* this kind of sentimentalism. I find it to be lying. Its stupid and dishonest.
> 
> It \[really\] comes from tribal attachment and again the threat **you** feel from so called hellenism, from the outside. But if **you** were successful in your particularism **you** would also be universal, you see.”

BAP is speaking directly to Zionists here who he accuses of being “Particularists” because it helps them defend Zionism. Earlier in the show he had a lengthy segment of the absurd and mundane particularism of “academia” in which he humorously runs through the titles of anthropological papers in the “marxoid” academy. Is there a connection BAP is pointing to when he points to the weak, degraded “particularism” of both Marxoid academics and conservative Zionists? One almost gets the feeling there is a connection. But “this is comedy show.”

We should pause here to insert one of the great moments of BAPism. Is this BAP? Allegedly this is BAP. In which he chastises Bill Kristol after the 2016 election for his failure to perceive immigration as a destabilizing force in America. But Kristol contends *Trade* rather than immigration was where voters felt most betrayed, and he also places importance on the idea of the US having a “tradition of taking refugees.” There is an exoteric reading of this confrontation, that BAP wants what is good for the American people. But there is an esoteric reading as well. That BAP, the Straussian, is accusing Kristol, the Straussian, of failing in his fundamental duty as a Straussian - to use his position of influence as a philosopher to protect “his people” which in this case means preventing the destabilization of America through the restraining of the impulses of the “academic elite” to resentfully import foreigners to replace native workers. What else has conservatism become but a brake - a restraining force - on progressivism? What would happen if there were *unchecked immigration*? Unchecked progressivism?

What *has* happened? Has world historic mass immigration been a boon for Zionism or the people Zionism is intended to protect? Does the policy and tradition of “taking refugees” still help the Jewish people? No. BAP was right. Perhaps the Jewish people should take a lesson from *Qin Shi Huang* and build a wall behind them.

Immigration has been a political disaster and Jewish causes in the intervening years have become deeply unpopular across the political spectrum. Interestingly, despite BAP’s rhetoric about supporting white working class voters he has come out strongly of late *against* the President Trump’s trade policies, saying “Trade is not a jobs program” and has aligned himself *against* America First political commentators in general. One way that we can explain this apparent paradox is that BAP, like Strauss, is not in favor of America becoming destabilized - in this case through third world immigration - and neither is he, like Strauss, in favor of America becoming a so called “closed” society. At least not if that means America becoming a closed society at the expense of BAP’s favored groups.

But this is not a smoking gun in any sense that BAP is a Straussian. In fact, if anything he is *criticizing* a Straussian here. Let’s go back to BAP’s lecture on Strauss:

> “So I mean to say \[Strauss’s\] project in America would have had two elements at least. Maybe even entirely unrelated: One, his honest desire as a scholar to protect classical education… from the desires of modern scholars to *historicize* them… This is a real problem in America. It’s very annoying. The scholar is trained to assume a superior attitude to his subject… On the other hand, there is a definite \[*political project*\].”
> 
> “His *political project* was this: When he came to America he noticed the problem of ***the** **leftist Jewish intellectual***, which he was very well acquainted with, a very real problem in Europe and really ***was the cause of the holocaust***. By the way I’m not just saying that to be… *provocative* … the types of hard right Zionists I have mentioned always blamed the Holocaust in Europe on the *Jewish intellectual left*. Thats the milieu that Strauss came out of.”
> 
> “Think of yourself in that position. You’re in this *new country* with this *new orientation*. You are trying to first of all find a way to show gratitude to this regime that is fighting Bolshevism. That seems at least to be, even if its kind of a \[farce\] but still *role plays* at conserving some elements of preserving classical culture… and second of all, and this is the crucial part, in this new country you see the Jewish intellectual with his attraction - again I think its a sociological explanation \[referring to Cuddihy and his idea of the ordeal of civility\] - with a deep attraction to Marxism… I think basically all of what gets called Straussianism in America - I’m not talking about his \[philosophical works\] - but the academic school of Straussianism is an exoteric project to try to get the American intellectual Jew to support America against the Soviets and to not be marxists any longer.”
> 
> “If I had to design a series of propositions: how do you turn the American Jew away from Marxism and toward Patriotism? You can’t do better almost than what Strauss came up with.”
> 
> “Also it worked on Catholics. Both of these groups are alienated from mainline WASP society”
> 
> “It is actually a way to… I don’t want to say *to trick* … but a way to entice and seduce the American intellectual Jew away from his semi natural path into Marxism.”
> 
> “I don’t think there’s anything wrong with this. It was more like… ‘god how do I get rid of these nebishes? To not become Hannah Arendt and become anti-American moralistic… you know *oblivious ethnic faggots* that so many of them seem to do.’ Anyway thats what my view of what Straussianism is.”
> 
> “He himself may have been… I think he was quite nazi spiritually… but his project in America was something much more realistic and moderate than, you know, yes \[mocking\] I’m going to corrupt it. Get Bush to be Hitler or whatever… or to get Barry Goldwater to be Hitler…”
> 
> “ [Shadia Drury](https://archive.org/details/20240129_20240129_2353/Leo%20Strauss%20and%20the%20American%20Right%20--%20Shadia%20B.%20Drury%20--%201999%20--%20Palgrave%20Macmillan%20--%209780312217839%20--%2018053f84405c5c786a6734747197c2c1%20--%20Anna%E2%80%99s%20Archive/) is a retard but… I think its almost indisputable that Strauss was kind of Nazi in his youth… I heard rumors that students of his at University of Chicago where his archives are and that they actually burned \[implicating\] letters there…”
> 
> “The young Straussians today certainly are what Gottfried said. They are fanatical believers in libtardism. But I don’t think its fair to say Strauss was that.”
> 
> “All these schools and ways of thought are relics of the cold war and they are unable to process what is happening after. What is happening now.”

\*libshit voice\* *There’s a lot to unpack here.*

What BAP is saying about Strauss is that he instigated a political and philosophical program that was intentionally misleading and untruthful in order to try to *trick*, or *seduce* Jewish intellectuals away from Bolshevism in America because their propensity towards ~~perpetual resentment~~ Bolshevism caused them to become the victims of mass murder when they did it in Europe.

Put another way, Leo Strauss was trying to use his fortunate placement at the New School as a platform from which to launch a project he felt would help restrain Jewish Academics from their *natural impulses* for their own benefit, turning the American Academy into a kind of *Katechon* for Jews.

This is obviously a deeply personal story for BAP. Because Strauss’s experiences so closely mirror his own. And Strauss’s philosophical beliefs, BAP claims, like his own, are deeply derivative of Nietzsche’s. This is only a partial inference on my part. Elsewhere in the lecture BAP literally says “\[Strauss’s\] orientation is also my orientation.”

Let’s look again: “Think of yourself in that position. You’re in this *new country* with this *new orientation*. You are trying to first of all find a way to show gratitude to this regime that is fighting bolshevism. That seems at least to be, even if its kind of a \[farce\]”

BAP is describing himself here, not just Strauss. I think its apparent to anyone who has encountered BAP that his “Pro-America” sentiments are earnest and he really does want to show his appreciation for the Americans fighting against Marxism so called. But also:

> “It is actually a way to… I don’t want to say *to trick* … but a way to entice and seduce the American intellectual Jew away from his semi natural path into Marxism.”
> 
> “I don’t think there’s anything wrong with this. It was more like… ‘god how do I get rid of these nebishes? To not become Hannah Arendt and become anti-American moralistic… you know oblivious ethnic faggots that so many of them seem to do. Anyway thats what my view of Straussianism is.”

It is not a nice feeling to be tricked or used, least of all for America First, Pro-Trump Republicans and Christians to be disingenuously used as fodder for some kind of *Jewish improvement project*. Or as subterfuge in some special *game within a game* which is only meant for other Jews. If a podcast was marketed as a secret game for fascist Jews would it get much attention? I don’t know maybe ironically. But if that secret game was couched within a broader target market, like anti-libtardism, you’d certainly catch more of the folks you’re really interested in that way.

I understand that BAP’s apparent personal connection to or empathy for Strauss is not proof that he is also participating in his project of *Katechonservatism*, of variously restraining or empowering Jews surreptitiously - which is *the* consistent thread among devotees of Strauss, much more than any shared set of political or philosophical beliefs.

In fact BAP frequently downplays his relationship to the Straussians and also downplays the nature and success of the Straussian project itself. But on the other hand BAP did a PHD in Straussianism. It’s hard to think that was accidental. It’s not like you can just trip and fall and accidentally wind up doing a PHD in Straussology.

More than that, not only does BAP do a PHD in Strauss, his PHD itself contains a Straussian message, and BAP clearly outdoes Strauss and all of his followers, both in his exoteric philosophical analysis and in his esoteric prescription for his “other market.” As BAP says: “All these schools and ways of thought are relics of the cold war and they are unable to process what is happening after. What is happening now.”

## The Secret Message in BAP’s Thesis

I’m going to start from the assumption that you’ve read BAP’s thesis and listened to its restatement in episode 162 of Caribbean Rhythms. I think you will still be able to follow along if you haven’t. But that’s going to my assumption.

While reading BAP’s dissertation you likely noticed frequent awkward phrasing and the avoidance of a particular word. Outside of his dissertation you may notice this as well. Often you will see somewhat awkward constructions from BAP like: “breeding and training” or “the well bred and the well turned out.”

We know that selective breeding and training comes from animal husbandry and specifically from horse breeding and horsemanship. And that the inventors of modern horse, the Indo-Europeans, the Yamnaya, however you want to refer to them, are the progenitors of Patriarchy and of European civilization as we know it. These were the people of the horse.

What is the person called who trains the horse? Who performs the turnout? Who selects the breeding?

*The groom*.

From the old english Brydgroom or Bridegroom. Bryd or bride means a young woman who is about to be bred. Let’s look at the tenses of this word:

Future, present, past.  
Bride, breed, bred.

Groom means groom. To train, to shape, to mold, to support, to refine, to influence, to restrain, to lead, to guide. It might be helpful to consider the bridle, the tool of the bridegroom or the one who prepares for breeding and training, to restrain and to lead the horse. It is worth considering why the word breeding/trainer is the word reserved for a future Patriarch in Indo-European/Christian society. This is a hint.

The reason BAP can’t use that word, which is integral to his philosophy, is because of its negative connotations as it relates to grooming gangs. They couldn’t be the same thing though. Surely…

BAP couldn’t be *grooming* *you* could he?

Let’s turn back to BAP’s discussion of the cult of Jewish homosexuals in American Academia - the Straussians.

In his lecture on Strauss BAP relates an interesting anecdote. He was invited to dinner party at which Camille Paglia was to be the guest of honor. *Did this really happen?* Or is BAP using this as tool to lead the listener to a comparison between Paglia and the Straussians?

At this “dinner party” BAP recounts two Straussians making conversation, referring to Strauss in the slightly *faggy* reverential tones anyone who has watched Bill Kristol and Harvey Mansfield’s gay intellectual youtube series will understand immediately.

He claims Paglia saw this, didn’t care about Strauss, and was bored by the conversation. Again. Did this happen? Or is BAP making an esoteric comment on what does or does not capture the attention of an audience?

BAP then segues into a comparison between the work of Allan Bloom and of Camille Paglia on how best to reform “The Academy” comparing Bloom (a Straussian) and his book *The Closing of the American Mind*, and *Paglia’s Junk Bonds and Corporate Raiders: Academe in the Hour of the Wolf*. Paglia, says BAP, is the far more engaging author on the subject, and critiques Bloom and the Strausians more generally for their lack of color and use of art for its own sake in their philosophical endeavour.

We should take a second here to pause and to give BAP a great deal of credit for the sophistication of his Straussian dissemblance here. What else do Allan Bloom and Camille Paglia have in common? What else do they write about?

Bloom and Paglia are both gay. Allan Bloom had a career making fools of conservative Christians supported him in his crusade against liberal decline on college Campuses. But behind closed doors Bloom was alleged to have been a decadent and and deeply promiscuous homosexual. Bloom died of AIDS in 1994.

Both Bloom and Paglia have written professionally on Plato’s conception of Diotima’s ladder, or the “Ladder of Love.” This is a conception that novel ideas, or true philosophical wisdom is “born” from an erotic cascade of desire:

1. Attraction to a single beautiful body
2. Attraction to all beautiful bodies
3. Attraction to beautiful souls
4. Attraction to beautiful laws and institutions
5. Attraction to the eternal forms of beauty in the abstract, which leads to the birth of philosophy - or an understanding of the underlying beauty of the universe.

What may be confusing to some who are not familiar with the ladder of love, for Plato it means that erotic attraction to *all beautiful bodies* is a necessary precondition of true philosophical understanding. Which is to say more precisely we find in Diotima’s Ladder an *apologia for homosexual pederasty*. At the end of this process of erotic transformation a teacher has, with luck, groomed his new ~~homosexual~~ Philosopher.

BAP is revealing in this segment whose defence of pederasty and homosexualism as a necessary precursor to philosophical wisdom he finds more convincing. He sides with Paglia, inspired by her sweeping cultural commentary and deep passion for *all beauty*.

If you feel perplexed: this is why BAP posts homoerotic images incessantly as part of his philosophic practice. Why BAP defends promiscuity and pornography. Why he makes sure to redefine “degeneracy” as racial miscegenation rather than moral failing. In turn it is the same reason for his frequent discussion of film, architecture, classical music and food. And why he refuses to condemn the satanic immorality of transsexual marxist terrorism. *The transsexual part for BAP is not necessarily a bad thing*. In order for the philosopher to “birth” the tyrant, not only are deeply immoral acts of sexual depravity permitted, they are required.

Ok, ok. Clearly some of you are not *philosophers.* So in your naivety you may find the exploration and celebration of sexually degenerate practices “disgusting” but what you don’t realize is that being gay actually makes you *smart*. So take that *school bully*!

After all “the sexual market is the pinnacle of every other market.” A quote from the introduction to Selective Breeding and the Birth of Philosophy which is subtitled breeding, foundation of all law. This should remind you of the pathway of the erotic ladder we just considered.

For those who think I might be making too big a leap in my interpretations let’s turn to *Selective Breeding:*

> I cannot repeat enough, a conclusion he has reached from serious philosophical reflection, perhaps too-earnest reflection. *Callicles is in fact a philosopher who has discovered that the radical philosophic insight must consist in a rejection of the anachoretic and private philosophical life. He is not the voice of the city or the political community, less still merely of a gentleman, an “Attic Junker.” He is the voice of pre-Socratic philosophy become political.*
> 
> I offer the following speculative reconstruction of Callicles’ “philosophical” reasoning in favor of the pursuit of tyranny. Callicles’ chief concern is the salvation of the “better-turned-out” \[recall that “turn-out” is the profession of the *groom.* This awkward phrase means *groomed*.\] from corruption by the nomos and the liberation of such specimens from nomos. In this salvation and liberation is expressed at the very least the precondition for truth or the search for truth: but actually, I would claim, in this is expressed also truth itself. That is, the manifestation of truth in the world, “the shining out of the right by nature,” the “law of nature,” is the “better-turned-out” \[groomed\] freeing himself from and trampling on convention or nomos \[sexual taboo\]. Truth or right express themselves \[as gay\] in the preservation and emergence into the light of phusis or nature. In this context it is most significant that the word used by Callicles (and by Socrates) all along in their discussion for the “better-turned-out” \[groomed\] is erromenesteros, a word with biological connotations. This word comes from rhonnumi, to have strength, might, to be in good health; this word, the same that Plato uses in the Republic (sungeneia erromene, emphasizing inborn might and health at Rep. 491c; at 491d he uses the word in relation to botanical \[phuton\] or animal \[zoon\] growth) to describe the *potential philosopher* \[candidate for grooming\], is often otherwise used to indicate vigor, vigorous growth, vehemence. The preservation of the “superior breed” \[hot guys\] or biological specimen is the preservation of nature in the world and therefore the guarantee of the emergence of \[~~homosexuals~~\] truth about the world. Callicles might say, “The natural, original activity of the erromenesteros is philosophy \[homosexualism\] —it is what the erromenesteros \[groomed\] gladly pursues in his childhood and youth—but it didn’t work; it leads to men like Socrates being killed; it leads to the extinction of breeding \[hot guys\] and therefore of \[~~gays~~\] the knowledge of nature in the world; for nature and truth to preserve and manifest themselves the ‘philosophers,’ \[gays\] or rather the erromenesteroi \[groomed\], the men of ‘sufficient nature’ \[hot guys\] from whom the philosopher \[tyrannical gay guy\] would under ideal circumstances organically emerge, must take power in the cities and grasp for a tyranny.” It is the “spiritual tyranny” of pre-Socratic philosophy become politically active under emergency conditions of persecution and turned into the pursuit of actual tyranny \[gay Hitler\]. According to Callicles one may restate the relationship between philosophy and the erromenesteros in this way: the distinction between nature and convention is inextricably tied to the distinction between superior \[gay\] and inferior \[straight\] human natures. Convention only originates and consists in the common decisions of the inferior \[straight\] to protect themselves from the superior \[gays\], and convention or myth and false speech \[religion\] is the only element that covers up nature and truth \[that gays are superior\]. It is the superior human specimens or the erromenesteroi \[groomed\] who have the unique access to the distinction between nature and convention \[antinomian knowledge as illustrated by Paglia in her discussion of the erotic ladder\], and they only have this access in the best circumstances; they are ever in danger of being corrupted, enslaved, smothered by nomos \[morality\]. It is the issue of the erromenesteros that is central in the Gorgias. The word erromenesteros represents the raw natural element of superiority, as opposed to words such as phronimos \[wise\], kreitto \[noble\], beltion \[expert\], and so on, which all indicate a particular direction in which the native superiority has been trained. Callicles’ definition of the superior as erromenesteros \[groomed\] is the only one that Socrates does not attack later. The interest of the erromenesteros \[groomed\] drives all of Callicles’ speeches and explains his passion and the sense of immediate or impending doom in his words. It is critical to realize that Callicles believes Socrates himself is a man with “sufficient nature,” or one of the superior. He refers to him repeatedly as “of noble nature,” or “well-natured” \[485d, 486b\]; but he does this mainly in the context of stating that no matter how well-natured or superior a man is, the excessive practice of philosophy will corrupt \[diaphtheirein\] \[BAP says corrupt but the better word is probably ossify\] him and make him worse. This is of course the same word in the famous charge of the city against Socrates, as in Plato’s and Xenophon’s Apology, where the court’s indictment is reproduced; its use by Callicles, however, only serves to emphasize the stark difference between the two meanings of corruption or degeneration, the conventional meaning on one hand, the natural meaning of the other. Callicles uses the natural meaning of corruption, and this is precisely the unavoidable issue that binds the tyrant and the philosopher, as we will have the occasion to see in this study. A man who practices philosophy late into life will be kept in a state of permanent childhood—at least this is the main point of Callicles’ discussion at 485a-c; in other words, the lion will not be able to break free. \[BAP is saying here that the purpose of doing gay philosophy is so that one can become gay Hitler\]
> 
> Now, the breaking free of the lion is for Callicles the manifestation of truth. It is significant that in the model just sketched out, the primal truth is a manifestation of natural superiority in the world. Truth, nature, and nobility or physical-mighty beauty, all one and the same, are manifest for Callicles. By contrast speech is used for deception, speech belongs to convention, and truth is hidden only by the false and deceptive speech of convention. Convention, shame, \[aiskhune\] and the inferior many, are one and the same—they use deception in speech to cover up manifest truth.
> 
> It is in this sense that in Callicles’ speeches the escape from convention through the assertion of raw superior nature over the many is a philosophical act, for it literally expresses the love of truth, or even more literally, is the only genuine expression of truth, the only moment when truth is uncovered and “unforgotten.” The love of the liberation of the erromenesteros is the love of truth, for this and only this is the manifestation of truth. For Callicles, Socrates’ impending execution by a lower form of man, by a mokhtheros \[486b-c\] is the best example of how philosophy, which was born with the discovery of nature and thereby with the awakening of the superior human specimens, is completely unable to actually provide for their advantage, but works instead for their corruption, enslavement, and destruction. Paradoxically, it is not philosophy that is the liberation for the superior human natures even though philosophy is in some sense the “original” activity of such natures. It is only rhetoric or tyranny won through the art of rhetoric that can provide the means to liberation and defense for philosophers: philosophers merely practicing philosophy are thereby committing suicide, and the suicide of philosophy at the hands of the many or of convention is the covering-up of truth, quite literally. Philosophers must become rhetoricians and tyrants; this itself is, in a convoluted way, “philosophical activity.” I will have more to say on the relationship between Callicles’ philosophical nature and his pursuit of tyranny later; for now it is necessary to consider what Socrates has to say about Callicles’ attack on conventional justice.

Ok. I have tried to point out here what BAP is leading you towards. What he is *grooming* you for. He wants you to become gay because he believes that in becoming gay you can free yourself from the bounds of traditional morality. He wants to smash the lies of religion which he believes restrict homosexuals (philosophers) for the benefit of the inferior masses (heterosexuals). He wants philosophers (enlightened homosexuals) to create their own religion and in fact, their own state.

When he is referring to the requirement to go beyond just philosophy - which Strauss believes through his esoteric reading of Maimonides is the profession of crafting or reinterpreting religion in a utilitarian fashion for the furtherance of a race - he has a specific program in mind that is best left at least slightly obscured, or at least would be irresponsible to spread freely. Since the Straussian moment is over we won’t hide it in double talk, we’ll just put it behind a paywall as a footnote.

There is a way in which this project of mandatory homosexualism all feels a bit ridiculous. Like something we might make fun of shitlibs for - state mandated homosexuality. That’s because these questions have all already been answered. Christianity is the synthesis of Athens and Jerusalem that plagues Strauss. I don’t mean that in a proselytizing way, it is just obvious, not only by the extraordinary success of Christendom and its domination of all others, I mean philosophically as well.

Immaculate conception completely *mogs* the concept of the erotic ladder. No longer do we require homosexuality, or in fact sexuality at all, to give *birth* to the king, tyrant, philosopher, or idea of god/nature. It is a problem that has been solved.

Likewise the intra-societal conflict between varying understandings of kingship is resolved through Christ. In *Selective Breeding* BAP gives an extensive account of George Frazer’s extraordinary explanation for a particular “primitive Roman ritual where a cultic “king of the wood,” lacking in all civil power, is ‘sacrificed.’”

Of course Girard improves Frazer on this topic. The reason for the tradition of ritual murder of the sacral king is mimetic desire and inevitable collective mimetic resentment of the better man. Society achieves communal harmony and equality by *killing* the better man. One recalls the collective murder of Julius Caesar. In [Prolegomena to the study of Greek Religion](https://archive.org/details/prolegomenatostu00harr) Jane Harrison uncovers a similar, hidden, primitive religion underlying the Indo-European religion of the Greeks, in which she uncovers under the guise of Zeus worship, the secret worship of a Snake god called *Zeus Meilichios.* Harrison paints a picture of the upper class practicing a half believing form of the religion Zeus, and of the lower class practicing a fearful sacral religion of Zeus Meilichios (the snake).

We know today these contrasting, concurrent religious traditions present in Ancient Greece trace their origins to the culture of the conquering steppe nomads, the Aryans of Hitler’s Ahnenerbe, and of the communal agrarians who they conquered. It is from the Steppe nomads that we received Patriarchy and from the agrarians we received matriarchal communalism - more or less.

Maybe the most important difference between these two societies is how they relate to their Kings. The Steppe Nomads raise them up. Agrarians tear them down. This is the gulf between Athens and Jerusalem identified by Strauss which Christ solves. He is the king who is both ritually sacrificed and exalted, creating a religious structure almost *providentially designed* to incorporate the specific anthropological elements of European culture. The serendipity is difficult to explain in the language of atheism.

We even find in Christendom an extraordinary solution to the supposed homosexual philosopher tyrant archetype put forward by BAP, and if we believe him, the ancients. *The Church* serves the societal function of the Katechon, restraining, training, and *neutering* these types, pointing their monstrous cunning and ambition towards another end, the Papacy.

So if these questions have been asked and answered, why do Strauss, Bloom, BAP, and Paglia reject them? If we can put our Burnham goggles back on, and if you will forgive me for being somewhat Groyperous here: They reject the revelations of Christ because they are gay and Jewish. In this manner they go from the antinomianism of a philosopher who crafts a “noble lie” in order to align the people of earth with the image of god in heaven, to the hedonism of *peasant antinomians*, resentful of Christ and desperate to create a permission structure for their own particular vice. In doing so they try to create a parallel Katechon with the goal of creating a new messiah more Christian than Christ. The Antichrist.

From Peter Thiel’s essay on the Straussian moment:

> In the medieval Catholic tradition, Schmitt sees the permanent political division of humanity as a pale reflection of an “eschatologically conceived state of historicity,” which ultimately forces people to follow or reject Christ. He connects the political and the religious by declaring himself against the “neutralizers, aesthetic inhabitants of Cockaigne, abortionists, cremationists and pacifists.”° Just as pacifists believe that the political decision can be avoided in this world, so cremators reject the physical resurrection and the religious decision that needs to be made for the next world. In this way, politics serves as a constant reminder to a fallen humanity that life is serious and that there are things that truly matter, and so Schmitt cites with great approval the Puritan Oliver Cromwell’s speech denouncing Spain:
> 
> “ *Why, truly, your great Enemy is the Spaniard. He is the natural enemy. He is naturally so; he is naturally so throughout, by reason of that enmity that is in him against whatsoever is of God. “Whatsoever is of God” which is in you, or which may be in you!*”

Again: “the political division of humanity is a pale reflection of an ‘eschatologically conceived state of historicity,’ which ultimately forces people to follow or reject Christ.”

The Straussian moment is over. Everything is in the open and we are forced to choose decisively to follow or reject Christ.